---
title: "Social comparison for concern and action on climate change, racial injustice, and COVID-19."
collection: publications
permalink: /publication/2022-03-01-SocComp
excerpt: ' '
date: 2022-03-01
venue: 'Analyses of Social Issues and Public Policy'
paperurl: 'https://doi.org/10.1111/asap.12309'
citation: 'Ulichney, V., Jarcho, J. M., Shipley, T. F., Ham, J., & Helion, C. (2022).&quot; Social comparison for concern and action on climate change, racial injustice, and COVID-19.&quot; <i>Analyses of Social Issues and Public Policy</i>, 22(2), 469-489.'

---

[Access paper here](https://doi.org/10.1111/asap.12309)

Preventing the negative impacts of major, intersectional social issues hinges on personal concern and willingness to take action. This research examines social comparison in the context of climate change, racial injustice, and COVID-19 during Fall 2020. Participants in a U.S. university sample (n = 288), reported personal levels of concern and action and estimated peers' concern and action regarding these three issues. Participants estimated that they were more concerned than peers for all three issues and took more action than peers regarding COVID-19 and climate change. Participants who reported higher levels of personal concern also estimated that they took greater action than peers (relative to participants who reported lower levels of concern). Exploratory analyses found that perceived personal control over social issues were associated with greater concern and action for racial injustice and climate change but not for COVID-19. This indicates that issue-specific features, including perceived controllability, may drive people to differently assess their experiences of distinct social issues.

Recommended citation: Ulichney, V., Jarcho, J. M., Shipley, T. F., Ham, J., & Helion, C. (2022).&quot; Social comparison for concern and action on climate change, racial injustice, and COVID-19.&quot; <i>Analyses of Social Issues and Public Policy</i>, 22(2), 469-489.
